sleep is perhaps the single most
effective thing that we can do
each and every day to reset the health
of our brain
and our body and by understanding a
little bit more about what sleep is
perhaps we can get the chance to improve
both the quantity
and the quality of our sleep
[Music]
so exactly what is sleep
well sleep at least in human beings is
subdivided
into two main types on the one hand we
have
non-rapid eye movement sleep or non-rem
sleep for short but
on the other hand we have rapid eye
movement sleep or
rem sleep and non-rem sleep has been
further subdivided into four separate
stages
unimaginatively called stages one
through
four increasing in the depth of sleep
and as we go into those light stages of
non-rem sleep
your heart rate starts to decrease your
body temperature starts to drop
and your electrical brain wave activity
starts to slow down
but as we move into deeper non-rapid eye
movement sleep
stages three and four now all of a
sudden
the brain erupts with these huge big
powerful brain waves the body is
actually
recharged in terms of its immune system
we also get this beautiful overhaul of
our cardiovascular system
and in fact upstairs in the brain deep
non-rem sleep will help consolidate
memories
and fixate them into the neural
architecture of the brain
so that's non-rem sleep but let's come
on to
rem sleep which is the other main type
of sleep and it's
during rem sleep when we principally
have the most
vivid the most hallucinogenic types of
dreams
the brainwave activity actually starts
to speed up again
it's during rem sleep that we receive
almost a form of
emotional first aid and it's also during
rem sleep where we get a boost for
creativity that it stitches information
together
so that we wake up with solutions to
previously
difficult problems that we were facing
coming back to these two types of sleep
it turns out that
non-rem and rem will play out in a
battle for brain domination throughout
the night
and that cerebral war is going to be
won and lost every 90 minutes
and then it's going to be replayed every
90 minutes
and what this produces is a standard
cycling
architecture of human sleep a standard
90-minute cycle
but what's different however is that the
ratio
of non-rem to rem within those 90-minute
cycles
changes as we move across the night such
that in the first half of the night
the majority of those 90-minute cycles
are comprised of
lots of deep non-rem sleep particularly
stages
three and four of non-rem sleep but as
we push through to the
second half of the night now that seesaw
balance
actually shifts over and instead
most of those 90-minute cycles are
comprised
of a lot more rapid eye movement sleep
or dream sleep
as well as stage two non-rem sleep that
lighter form of non-rem sleep
and it turns out that there are
implications
for understanding how sleep is
structured in this way
let's take someone who typically goes to
bed
at 10 pm and they wake up at 6 00 a.m so
they have an
8 hour sleep window but this morning
they have to wake up
early for an early morning meeting or
they want to get a jump start on the day
to get to the gym
and as a consequence they have to wake
up at 4 00 am in the morning
rather than 6 a.m in the morning how
much sleep have they actually lost
2 hours out of an 8 hour night of sleep
means that they've lost
25 of their sleep
well yes and no they have lost
25 of all of their sleep but because rem
sleep
comes mostly in the second half of the
night and particularly in those last few
hours
they may have lost perhaps 50 60 maybe
even
70 of all of their rem sleep
so there are real consequences to
understanding what sleep is and how
sleep is structured
and we'll learn all about the benefits
of these different stages of sleep
and the detriments that happen when we
don't get enough of them
in subsequent episodes